# Sentiment Analysis for miRNA::Gene Interaction Extraction

This repository contains an integrative sentiment analysis model designed to extract sentences from biomedical literature that demonstrate interactions between miRNAs and genes. 
The analysis leverages BioBERT, a domain-specific BERT model, to gain a deeper understanding of these interactions.

The repository utilizes three distinct transformer-based models to generate sentence embeddings, capturing the semantic intricacies of miRNA::gene relationships. 
Additionally, a variety of machine learning and deep learning approaches are applied, including traditional classifiers like Logistic Regression, SVM, and Random Forest, 
as well as more advanced architectures such as GRU, CNN, and LSTM. 
These models are further refined through fine-tuning to enhance performance and accuracy.

###  Set up the project in a virtual conda environment

1. If you have `conda` installed, create the environment using the provided `environment.yml`:

   ```bash
   conda env create -f environment.yml
   conda activate mirna_gene_SA_bert

2. Clone the repository:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/zacharopoulou/mirna_gene_SA_bert.git
   cd mirna_gene_SA_bert
And activate the virtual environment as described above.

3. Data and Results

   The train, test, and evaluation sets for the sentiment analysis task are located in the data directory.

   The results of the scripts, including the trained models, can be accessed on Zenodo. The models and other files are uploaded there for easy download and usage.

4. This repository contains several Jupyter Notebooks (*.ipynb) for different stages of the sentiment analysis and model training pipeline. Below is an explanation of the purpose of each script:

    *_algorithms.ipynb: These scripts are used for applying transformer-based models to extract features. The features generated by the models are then used to make predictions about miRNA::gene interactions. These models are based on pre-trained transformers like BioBERT and are used to generate sentence embeddings that capture the semantic relationships between miRNAs and genes.

    *_fine_tuning.ipynb: These scripts are used to fine-tune the pre-trained transformer models. Fine-tuning involves training the models further on your specific dataset, with the goal of adapting them for the classification task at hand. In these scripts, a top classification layer is added to the transformer models to classify the sentences based on the interaction between miRNAs and genes.

    Ensemble_approach.ipynb: This script represents the final step in the pipeline. Here, an ensemble approach is applied to combine the outputs of the best-performing models. The script calculates scores from the combination of these models, which helps to improve the overall performance and robustness of the predictions.
